back to another episode of Between Sermons.
I'm the host, Brent.
I get to be the lead pastor here at Disciples Church.
And this podcast, if you're new, is all about turning our Sunday sermon into a conversation.
We take the monologue and we turn it into dialogue.
And we're gonna have a lot of fun today as we dive into the first half of Luke chapter two, because as a church, we are just walking through the book of Luke together, kind of a slow journey, getting all that we can possibly get out of God's Word.
together.
And so for this conversation, I am joined by two amazing people.
My wonderful co-host as always, Taisha.
How you doing?
I'm well.
Happy Monday.
Yes.
I'm happy because my sister's here and we're matching.
Is that always weird because we record this on Monday, but it goes live on Wednesday.
So it's our people like, happy Monday.
So you're saying I shouldn't say that?
I'm asking.
I don't know how these things work.
Happy day when you're watching this.
Happy day.
Whatever day it is, it's the day.
I mean, and that kind of goes along with your message, because you were talking about the birth of Jesus, but we'll get to that later.
Christmas and February.
Yeah, Christmas and February.
So it just goes.
I'll keep that in mind.
How are you, Pastor Brand?
You never answer the question on the show.
Oh, I'm good.
OK.
So how are you living the dream right?
I honestly yesterday was wonderful.
I didn't I didn't host I didn't preach.
I just like I saw that that was I was her armor bearer.
That was top tier.
What if you need baby?
You want some coffee?
I'll go get you coffee.
Oh, he did.
He actually got me Starbucks, which is awesome.
I tried, you know, especially I mean it was the day after Valentine's Day.
You can't
Be a good husband around Valentine's Day.
What are you doing?
I'm not gonna tell you my story.
We're gonna keep going.
That's another story.
But anyway, let's welcome, well, you're not a guest.
You're kind of like the co-owner of this show between sermons.
It's been a while since you've been here.
You miss between sermons?
I do.
I miss everything.
for the time when I'm not doing it.
Was it the last episode that you started promising like a men's only podcast?
Yes, it was last week.
I said we need to give this show to Pastor Asa and Pastor Carlton.
And then we create our own show.
It just won't remember the words.
I know.
Yeah, I know we did.
We said promises were made last week.
I don't know if people have already started calling you out on those promises.
Not yet.
Maybe in a couple of weeks, but we'll see.
We will see.
Yeah.
So are you excited to dive in?
I am.
Where do you want to go?
Where do you want to start?
No, we're going to start.
Go ahead and give us a quick recap of what this message was without, you know, spoiling.
So look to is just the well, the first part, the part that I was talking about is just the narrative of Jesus's birth.
So it's Christmas.
It's my favorite thing, right?
I think that for me, what was unique about this one is that it is the story that you hear every single year.
You know, it is the story that comes around every December, right?
It's the Christmas story, it's the Christmas story.
But in a more deeper way, I had to study so many things and I had to learn so many things that was really neat because
I love Christmas.
I love the Christmas story, but not knowing all of the little tidbits, it just brought it to life so much more.
But yeah, it was basically Christmas.
So that's your summary.
That's my summary.
Because that's what it is.
The story of Jesus chapter two versus one through twenty one.
It's it's the birth of Jesus.
Twenty two through what is it?
Fifty four.
Fifty two.
Fifty one.
Fifty three.
He's just he's throwing numbers there.
Fifty four.
Fifty two.
No.
Fifty two is in my head because it's our and there's more.
Okay.
Well, let's confirm that next week.
We're going to rest with this week.
Yeah, so the second half is Jesus as a kid.
Yeah.
So the first half is Jesus' birth.
So we start off this chapter, chapter two, with the governor giving kind of, I'm not going to pronounce his name.
I don't know if Maureen.
Carinius.
What is it?
Giving this decree, I guess.
Well, actually, that was a Caesar, the one that said that had to happen.
So that, OK, so wait.
Let's stop there.
There was a little controversy around this passage that kind of tried to discredit or tries to discredit the account of Jesus being born because of the confusion of who was governor during that time.
So let's unpack that first.
Yeah.
So if you look up Luke two, like just type in Luke two controversy.
like it's gonna give you Google the people.
Yeah, it's gonna give you a lot of argumentation against Luke's authenticity or Luke's historical accuracy.
So it's usually like the common objection.
So when scholars will say, man, Luke was actually an excellent historian, people say, what about Luke too?
Because basically he addresses Caesar Augustus doing something, Herod later on doing something in the same timeframe, and then this Carinius guy doing something.
but the timeline doesn't match up of those three individuals and what they're declaring.
So like Herod would have been dead before Carinius was in power.
And so it's like one of those where Luke's details can get a little bit muddy in that.
And it is a difficult passage to reconcile when you look at historical accounts.
Something to keep in mind is
the historical accounts of that time period are very, very, very, very loose.
Like we don't have perfect documentation of what was going on.
And so there's like five or six different plausible explanations for Luke's timeline that would make it historically accurate.
And so like some of it comes down to language issues.
So the Greek word for first can also mean before.
And so if you translate it as before, then all of a sudden the timeline works because it's like, oh, before he did this, he did this.
And so then there's an argument for Corineas served twice in leadership.
It was like a double service, like he served as governor, and then he wasn't, and then he was again.
And so it could be about one of his previous terms in office.
There's another theory that, so Roman,
I don't know how to phrase this so like Roman rule or Roman occupation.
They would sometimes make a decree by one person and someone else would be responsible for carrying it out even if that person wasn't the governor yet.
So like it would almost be like I guess the modern modern equivalent would be like the what's the deputy.
the deputy governor, the deputy, whatever, deputy mayor, right?
And like I said, he's like, mayor does something, but the deputy actually like enforces it.
And so it's possible that Carinius wasn't governor yet, but his administrative task in the government structure was to do this census.
And so like, this is getting super nerdy and like most people are probably like, ah.
It goes somewhere.
So basically the bottom line is Luke II does have a difficult to,
process passage that historically like from a theological standpoint there's no issue with it from a historical standpoint it looks like there's a contradiction that okay this thing took place at this timeline but that doesn't make sense because of when people lived and died but like I said there's five or six different ways that we can interpret the text look at history and say this is a plausible solution to the problem and so I think that
You have to go into it with good faith.
Like if you have like a bad faith argument around it, you make definitive statements about things that we honestly can't know definitively.
We can't know definitively at this stage of what history we have, what documentation we have, because stuff from the first century didn't last very well.
And we're still making discoveries that things that originally people thought were wrong in the Bible,
there's now archeological evidence that proves the Bible was correct.
And we just didn't have the history to back it up yet.
And so it's kind of the same thing is happening with Luke too.
That there's this controversy, but it's played up by some and played down by others.
And the reality is it's somewhere in the middle where it's like, hey, we don't know.
Maybe Luke got this detail wrong.
I don't think he did.
I think that there's more going on.
And when there's plausible solutions to these difficulties,
I think we take it for at faith value, right?
Like we look at it and we say, okay, he's so accurate in so many areas that I can give him the benefit of the doubt with this one that our historical accounts are just not accurate enough to be able to tell me that he is lying or that he's wrong or to definitively prove that he's absolutely correct in this.
We just don't know.
So are they trying to discredit the birth of Jesus?
Like, why is it such a controversy?
So it's a controversy because they're trying to discredit Luke's historical accuracy.
Got it.
And so if Luke is not historically accurate, then a lot of what he writes can be dismissed.
Got it, okay.
And that would be around the birth, and the death, and the resurrection.
Oh my God.
And so because one of the big claims in Christianity, and even in secular world, is that Luke was a historian.
Like Luke was taking careful account.
Like he claims to be doing that.
But then we also see like some of the details in his writing, some of the things that he gets right.
There's all kinds of like, this is a super fascinating subject that you can like get your doctorate in if you're just curious about this specific thing.
And so yeah, it's, but if you can disprove Luke's reliability, then you can throw out his gospel.
Oh, man, I can preach by itself of why, you know,
It seemed like the enemy, he has all of these agendas.
So that's one of them.
Man.
So how, what would you advise somebody that is wrestling with, with questions like that?
You know, because even for me, like I have always just read names and stuff and some names resonate, some names don't, you know?
So when I was doing my study for this and I went to my friend Google and I Googled greenies, right?
And I started seeing all of the things that I was like, oh, I am not touching that.
So I just kind of like backed up.
But there are some people that are invested in it.
What advice will you give?
I think that for me personally, I think that my faith is at a place where I know that the word is true.
And I don't necessarily, I guess, put that much weight on what could be major for other people.
It's not that big for me personally.
But what would you say for people that feel like,
This is huge.
Right.
Yeah.
And and and something that you're saying there is basically like you're fully convinced that Jesus is Lord.
Right.
That he died on the cross and he rose again.
And so if Carinius made a decree or didn't like it doesn't change the fact in your mind that Jesus lived died and and rose again.
Yeah.
And so like I think that most people that are Christian already are probably going to have that mindset.
Like you're fully convinced by everything else that this one may be gray area.
And I even say it's got to be a maybe and it's got to be gray.
Like it's not black and white.
It's not definitive.
And anybody that's arguing that it is definitively he's wrong is not being honest with history.
And somebody that says definitively he's not wrong is probably not being accurate with history.
Like it is a gray area.
It is a maybe there's an issue here.
And we got to be honest with that.
And so like what I would say for the person that is struggling with it, look into the arguments for and the arguments against Luke chapter two.
And I think that every Christian, every believer needs to be well versed in arguments for their beliefs and arguments against their beliefs, right?
Like if all you ever read is, you know, somebody confirming your own bias,
you're intellectually dishonest.
And so you need to research and look into, okay, what are the pros and what are the cons?
What are the four and what are the against?
What scholars are saying this is an issue?
What scholars saying it's not?
Why are they saying it?
How are they saying it?
And then there's some people on YouTube that I trust with articulating some of those arguments.
One would be Mike Jones.
He goes by inspiring philosophy.
I don't know if he's done one on loop two, but he probably has.
He's done a lot of stuff.
And then another guy that's probably even more popular over the last couple of years, West Huff, has done some stuff around loop two, I believe.
But yeah, you gotta use research wherever you can.
When he said Mike Jones, I was like, the rapper.
No, very, very, very white guy, non-rapper.
No, that was funny.
IP, inspiring philosophy.
OK. Now, I think it's great to kind of like lead the conversation with just knowing a little bit of that, because when you start researching Luke II, you might run into that, and then you got questions.
Like, OK, why don't we cover this in the message?
Absolutely, yeah.
You know, so.
And it's like, for me, like, that's the,
I never want to shy away from or just gloss over difficulties in the text.
Yeah.
Like there, there are, and this isn't the only one.
Like there's, there's other difficulties in the text, but like I think that we can be faithful to God and faithful to his word when we try and argue against things.
Like when we come to the text and be like, okay, you said it, but is it true?
Right, and like sometimes we do have to have that because God said so.
Yeah.
Right, that faith that like he said it so I'm gonna follow through with it.
But I think there's also like, I hate when Christians are painted as people who are intellectually dumb, right?
Or Christians are painted as gullible or Christians are painted as brainwashed.
Yeah, they just believe it without faith.
It's just blind faith.
Like man, there's nothing in scripture that talks about blind faith.
No, faith is well-reasoned.
I mean, Thomas asks questions and gets answers.
And he's not mocked, he's not ridiculed, he's not kicked out of the group because he's got questions.
Jesus answers his questions.
You can take your questions to God.
That's encouraged, you're supposed to.
But yeah, the whole point of Luke's writing is to give us faith that's well-reasoned.
Like I've researched this, I've talked to the eyewitnesses, I'm gonna give you an orderly account of the things that I've discovered, right?
So our faith is not blind, it's built on a lot of great argumentation, it's built on historical evidence, it's built on so many things.
I mean, if we had time to just nerd out forever, we could talk about evidences for God and biblical accuracy and all kinds of stuff.
You can be extremely, extremely intellectually savvy
curious and all of that and be a faithful Christian.
Like this idea that like science and history and Christianity don't mesh is just, it's laughable when you actually study and you realize that so much of where science is today is based off of Christianity.
And I think something that is very important is that you don't feed just one part, right?
You don't just feed your brain to make things make sense.
And you don't feed just your spirit.
So did you just
feel the stuff.
I think that you have to be well-balanced in both.
Because, yeah, you want to understand what the word says.
You want to know why the things are where they are or what people say for and against and all of the things.
You want to be able to understand it mentally, intellectually, but you also have to have a component of faith, right?
To say, I might not fully understand every single thing.
I can understand
most of it or a great part of it.
I understand enough to trust.
Exactly.
And I have seen and I have heard and I have experienced in my life the goodness of God, the redemption of God, the transformation of the Holy Spirit to a place that in the in the in the voice, right?
In the things that I don't have answers for.
My faith can still uphold me.
Yeah.
So I don't think that it is one or the other.
I think that you need both.
Yeah.
I like that.
And yeah, it is the
where there's a gap in my knowledge or a gap in my understanding, faith steps in, but it also doesn't end the journey.
Right.
Right?
So just because I don't fully understand something or grasp it right now doesn't mean I won't in five years.
I need to put in the work.
My faith holds me up, but I'm going to keep researching.
I like that meshing the two together.
The two.
Balance.
We believe that over here at Disciples Church.
You need it.
Yeah.
Because if you just let your feelings move, then you end up in a lot of weird stuff.
100%.
Like seriously, you just end up doing all kinds of goofy things because it is just all about feelings, right?
And you just feel wiggly all the time, right?
I need to know what the goofy stuff is.
Let's list up.
There's a lot.
There's a lot that when you see
people that just consider themselves just spiritual.
They tap into a lot of different stuff that is just like, I don't know.
And you're pointing the Holy Spirit's name on it, but I don't think that he's there.
You didn't go sign that one.
You didn't now show up for that one.
And it's a lot of just show because of the feeling of it.
And when you just go intellectually, then there's the coldness of it is just all rational.
And it makes sense or it doesn't.
And the Bible says, you know, the blessed are those who have not seen but believe.
So there's a part in you that has to have faith.
But also there's things that we can't understand.
And that we have the blessing of being born in this time where it is just so easy for us to be able to research and have information about stuff that you cannot say, I don't know because I don't have access to it.
We have access to it.
So I think that you need both.
That's good.
I like it.
No, that is good.
So like the next part of this, I want to go the direction is the word sovereignty.
Do you know where I'm going with this?
Absolutely.
I have no clue where you're going with this.
But I'm here for the ride.
Caesar makes a decree.
Oh, oh, there you go.
I'm like, I'm here for the ride.
But God ordained it.
Oh, what?
One hundred percent.
Yeah, okay, okay.
You continue, you continue with your explosion.
So, I mean, okay, and I might be like pulling fire, because I remember we had this conversation about sovereignty a long time ago.
It's a fun subject.
Is sovereignty still at work today, or is this something that God, he used a lot of sovereignty, especially we can see that unpacking in Luke, we see that with,
Elizabeth, we, you know, getting pregnant with John and, and we see that with Mary and how she, you know, got pregnant as a virgin.
And that was a whole thing.
And then now we see it with, um, being the whole, uh, having to register and for tax purposes and how that pushed, um, Mary and her husband out to Bethlehem.
Like we see that at play.
How God just does things to get us to where we should be.
Is that something that can happen in 2025?
Or is that just something for.
It's 2026 now girl.
Oh, 2026.
I wasn't.
I wasn't talking to sovereignty there.
Yes.
2026.
So let's unpack that because people struggle with.
the word sovereignty, like things being orchestrated to get you to where you are.
So, yeah.
Yeah.
And it is a complicated, complex kind of conversation because you've got the sovereignty of God and you also have free will.
And both are fully at work all the time.
And so there are times when God allows free will to, hey, you want to make a dumb choice.
I'm going to let you make the dumb choice.
And so like God also has free will, right?
Like he can actually choose to exercise his sovereignty in the situation or he can let you just deal with your consequences.
And so a lot of times the way I'll look at sovereignty is more big picture.
I think even today God's sovereignty is exercised across the board, but we see it mostly in the big picture stuff.
And so, and that's even how we saw it in biblical times.
So like,
what Mary had for breakfast.
That wasn't that wasn't God Sovereignty like choosing.
OK, but she's going to and she's going to take this path because not like we don't see that in the text.
We see these big moments where it's OK. God is is bringing the Messiah about in fulfillment of prophecy.
So God Sovereignty is going to make it so that those
prophecies are accurate that they come to pass, right?
But he's still giving people free will to choose to do what they want to do and how they're going to do it.
Now, if you really want to break your brain, how does Mary's- I don't know.
What would have happened if Mary exercised her free will and told the angel no thanks?
Oh, that broke my brain.
Broke your brain?
Yep.
Totally.
That's going to mess with- Because what is- Some people are listening right now and they're like, why'd you have to say that out loud?
Um, and it's like, I don't know, like at that point, that's deep.
At that point, was there a backup?
Was there someone else?
I don't know.
And, and that's where it's like, this is where the philosophy of it and the breaking of the brain of it, like God's sovereignty.
He's also, uh, without time, you know, he's, he's pre-existent and, uh, eternal.
And so when he looks at the timeline, it's from the end, not from the beginning.
Uh, and so, uh, he already knows that Mary's going to say yes.
when he orchestrates everything.
So it's just, yeah, it's one of those.
The more you dig into it, the harder it gets.
So back to your actual original question, and I would love to get soul's take on this.
Is God sovereign still?
Absolutely 100%.
Does that mean that every bad thing happening to you is because God wanted it to happen?
Absolutely not.
We're going back here.
Yeah, and it's because free will exist.
And so because free will exist, you can make choices.
that are outside of God's plan.
And I actually heard, I think it might have been Mike Winger one time in like a Q&A.
He said something to somebody.
He's like, if any of you think that you're on God's plan A right now, like you have way too much faith in yourself.
Like none of us are on plan A or plan B or plan C. Like we've all messed it up so many times.
that you've absolutely, this is like, you don't have enough letters in the alphabet to describe what plan of God's you're on at this point because you were supposed to go left and you went right.
You were supposed to say yes and you said no.
You were supposed to do this and you didn't.
But God is still sovereign and he can work all things together for our good and that includes when we screw up.
So it's one of those where it's this wrestle of free will
and sovereignty and at what point does God's sovereignty override free will?
And that's one of those questions.
I don't know that I've got a perfect answer for.
I think that you've got to be faithful.
Do the things that you know you're supposed to do in the time and the way you're supposed to do them.
And you trust God that he's still working on everything.
And if I mess up here, he's sovereign enough that he can fix it.
And sometimes I got to deal with my consequences.
Like I did the wrong thing at the wrong time.
I got to eat that.
Yeah.
And I think that something that we see in that we are so, I'm so grateful for the Bible, right?
Because we have a full account of time, you know, from beginning to end to the moment that Jesus comes and everything is restored back to what it was supposed to be, right?
The new heaven, new earth.
Now, I think that in God's sovereign, like I, that's just how I feel about what I, what I understand is,
there are going to be things that happen in our world to kickstart the prophecies that have already been spoken over this earth.
And I think that that is where God's sovereignty happens.
We already know that there are going to be so many things that need to take place
in order for the end times to fully be here.
It is not just one day you wake up and everything was a mess.
I think that even the fact that our world is getting more out of control with one another, like contract against country, and globally it's just an unrest.
I think that the fact that even our
our climate, you know, the Bible talks about there's gonna be earthquakes and there's gonna be famines and there's gonna be all of these things.
I think that you can see that.
And I don't know how intense all of that has to get for the end times to fully be here.
But you can see how even our own choices as people
are taking us closer and closer and closer and closer to the fulfillment of that prophecy, right?
So I think that it is our choices, sure.
But I think in all of that, God had already taken all of that into consideration when he gave the word so many, so many centuries ago, saying this is what is going to take place and this is what it's going to see so that the Son of God can come, right?
So I think that all of that kind of lines up so that's what the whole
You don't know the decisions that you're making today are actually what is needed for this prophecy to be fulfilled.
So I think that's where it comes.
But I agree with Brand.
I think that in the, every day, I have heard a lot of people say, but there were prophetic words over my life and look where I'm at.
And something that is important for everybody to understand is that prophecy speaks to potential.
Like God sees something so incredibly beautiful in you, but it is,
up to you if you are gonna partner with God and believe for what he sees in you, or if you're gonna say no thank you and do your own thing instead.
You know, so it is, I don't know, it's complicated.
I don't know how to fully explain that, but is God sovereignty happening?
Yeah, there's nothing in this earth that will work any other way.
Yeah, I think the difference, so when somebody says, you know, God is sovereign in all things, that means
My flat tire this morning was God ordained.
It could be.
It's most likely not.
God ordained.
I have a story for that, but we're going to go here.
Sure.
You've got a story.
That's where the it could be comes into play.
Right.
But nine times out of 10, you got a flat tire because you drove over a nail.
And you drove over a nail because you drove this road and a truck came before you and a nail fell out of the bed of the truck.
And I don't know, and maybe I am wrong in my whole definition of words, right?
But I think that one thing is his sovereignty and another thing is his kindness and his faithful and his protection over you.
Okay.
You know, like when he sees you and he cares about you, like the Bible says that he cares about every single thing that happens in our lives, right?
So if he cares about you and he's being faithful to you and he is protecting you,
I think that that's one thing, and maybe I'm wrong, but I think that his sovereignty, he is without a ruler.
There's nobody else above him.
His will is done.
What he wants to accomplish, he's gonna be accomplished.
I think that that's one thing.
I think that his mercy and his grace and his kindness towards us, I think that that is just a part of his nature and him watching over his children.
So I think that in my mind, they are two different things, not that they are fighting with each other, but it is not the same.
I don't know.
I don't know if that even makes sense.
Yeah.
No, I get what you're trying to say.
And I think sometimes it's that in his sovereignty, he acts with mercy.
Right.
So like, sovereignty is, this is what I want to happen.
You screwed up.
In my mercy, I'm going to fix it.
Not the eyes.
I'm like, yeah.
I know.
Every time I try to, I can find an opportunity to put that word in there.
I'm going to because I just, I don't know.
It's fascinating.
It is.
It's very fascinating.
Yeah.
I think the danger is when somebody comes to the conclusion that God controls everything always, all the time, and then uses that to justify sin in their life.
So I got pregnant because God wanted me to have this baby.
God didn't want you to have sex outside of marriage.
You got pregnant because you chose to sin.
Like, you chose to do something.
Can God use that baby?
Can God bring about good from it?
Absolutely.
Does that mean God wanted you to sin?
No, obviously not.
Or to explain away horrific things, you know, that mass shootings and stuff like that.
Well, he was God's sovereignty, you know?
Yep.
No, it was somebody that was broken, that acted in their brokenness, right?
So, yeah.
Oh, man.
It's just so much.
That one drives me crazy.
I go to a funeral and somebody says, well, God just wanted another angel.
First of all, people don't become angels.
That's not a thing.
But second of all, no, loved ones dying.
To say God wanted them to die is, man, that paints God as this cruel bully.
No, cancer exists.
People die from cancer.
Is that because God wants them to die from cancer?
No.
But he allows free will and the world to be broken.
And he intervenes sometimes and sometimes he just lets it run its course.
And he's still sovereign in either direction.
And he's still good.
And he's still, you know?
Yeah.
All right, I get it.
It's hard.
I don't know how you
I think that if anybody feels like they have a full answer of what it is and what it looks like.
Yeah.
100% of the cases and stuff.
It's probably not.
Yeah.
Just to see it painted in again, going back to Luke, I know that's something that because when I read it, I was like, ooh, sovereignty.
This is my word, you know.
And like, like there's, there are definitely times in my life where I feel like God stepped in and saved my life.
when I was doing something that should have ended my life.
And like God stepped in and I praise him for his sovereignty in that.
I think that there's also a reality that I may end up killing myself.
That came out really bad.
That came out so bad and I need to clean that up.
Where's the eraser?
I could make a mistake and do something and it cost me my life and it wasn't that God wanted me to die in that moment but he just chose not to intervene that time.
I'm okay with that reality of life, that there are times when God comes in and he saves a life, and there's times when he doesn't come in to save the life.
And in both cases, he's still sovereign.
That is something heavy to sit with, but it's very true.
Yeah.
This is a great podcast.
Everybody is like, my brain hurts and now I don't even know if I like church.
Oh my God.
I'm depressed now.
Let's talk about the good news.
Let's talk about the good news, which we all rejoice over the fact that Jesus was born.
And even I was reading
And I think you did a great job yesterday unpacking like the humility of his birth and how it all happens.
But just reading it and just some questions that started to come to my mind even was like, I'm not going to say the word sovereignty, but just how everything unpacked like him being the king.
and how his announcement was very, like, subpar.
Like, it was like, uh, underwhelming.
You know?
He didn't do it for the gram.
Right.
And it makes us evaluate our lives.
And I think you pointed that out, like, how, you know, God can have, like, these great plans for us, but just that humility piece, maybe expound a little bit more on that.
Yeah.
And it's not even just his birth.
It's, to me, is...
It starts with the pregnancy?
No, no, no, what I was gonna say, everything, like it is mind blowing.
So imagine anybody that has any type of influence.
You hear about them, what they ate, where they went, what they did, everything, right?
They have children and you hear everything about the children constantly.
They are like putting your faces, you cannot run from it.
And if you see Jesus, God,
becoming flesh, coming to this earth.
And like, I don't want to spoil what Pastor Jason will talk about, but if you read chapter two, there's three things that we know about Jesus.
The key grew in favor, in stature, in wisdom, in stature, in favor with God and men.
That's it.
That's all we know about Jesus' childhood, until he's 30.
We know his parents forgot about him.
Right.
Until he's 30, 30 years of Jesus on this earth that we have no idea what happened.
We don't know what school he went to.
We don't know his occupation.
We don't know how he was as a teenager.
We don't know anything.
How more humble than that can you be?
Now, is it a cultural thing?
Because we live in a world where
That's just the norm.
It's culture.
You know what I mean?
If he had Instagram back then, do you think Mary would have been like, look at my cute little baby?
Like, I don't know.
I don't know.
That's something that I will not be able to know.
But he didn't chose to be in the public.
But he could have chosen to inspire people to write about his childhood.
He could have chosen to have Luke as Mary all of his life and write it down.
That is not what we read.
So we have even in all of that, a humble God that it is not here just for you to know every single thing that he did and every single, you know, there's a lot of weird ideas out there that when I was studying, I was like, people really believe these things, you know, that Jesus was basically like the boss baby.
Like he was able to speak since he was a baby and that he was doing miracles when he was a little child and all of these things.
I'm like, what?
Like stuff like that, right?
But you don't hear anything about that.
So for as much as we know, he was just a regular child and he grew up just as anybody else that it is just normal.
So how more humble can you be?
So to bash more Christmas carols, which you seem to love to do on Sunday.
So the Christmas carol that says no crying he makes, totally bunk.
Like he was a baby.
So he cried.
He cried.
Like that's how you let your mom know you're hungry.
Yeah.
Right.
Now, so something that's interesting about Luke, his gospel account is he's the only one that includes anything about the childhood at all.
And the reasoning for that is, so Matthew,
was a disciple.
John was a disciple.
Mark is hanging out with Peter.
He's writing down Peter's account.
All of them basically start with his adult ministry because that's the part they were a part of.
That's why they met him.
Yeah.
Luke is the historian and he talks about eyewitness accounts.
So everybody is basically in agreement that one of the eyewitnesses that he interviewed was Mary.
And so that's why Luke's account is the only one that includes anything from his childhood because he sat with Mary and said, what was Jesus like as a baby?
Wow.
And so she gives him one story, apparently, that makes it in the text, the story of how they left him in the temple.
Yeah.
That's intense, which just like picturing that, like picturing Luke, like sitting on the couch, being like, all right, Mary, you know, this is thank you so much for helping my research.
You know, tell me about Jesus.
Man, he was just a normal kid.
Man, there was just this one wild time we left him in the temple.
You did what now?
So we're getting out of ourselves for next week.
But.
But yeah, so it is, I don't know, it is just mind-blowing to me that God comes here and is not trying to make a huge fanfare of himself.
And everybody look at me and everybody do things for me.
But it was humility.
And I think that...
Came to serve, not to be served.
Right.
And I think that we all should learn a lot from that.
Because I think that we lose the floor very, very quickly.
We lose the floor.
Yeah.
What is that?
I've never heard that term.
Well, like you start getting any type of influence.
You start getting any type of recognition and you're floating, right?
Like, I'm like, I'm just... That is... What did you learn that?
I lose the floor.
I'm gonna start saying that.
You're losing the floor.
You know, like... You need to be more grounded.
I ground it.
Exactly.
So I think that, I think that all of us, it's very easy for us to get into that lift up and just feel better than everybody else when
Jesus himself was was not.
So how do you balance because we do live in a world where influencers or people who take to social media to actually spread the gospel or teach them?
How do you balance those two without feeling like you're not being humble?
You know, because
You wouldn't have your favorite podcaster if he was like, I'm not going to share anything.
You know what I mean?
But I think the emphasis has to be, or where I put the emphasis, is it about me or is it about Jesus?
Got it.
I think that when influencers are trying to draw attention to themselves, that's not biblical.
You're trying to get the accolades at that point.
If you're using social media as a
tool to point people to Jesus, that's beautiful.
I love it.
And so that does make it very complicated for influencers.
Yeah.
Right.
Like how much of your posting is just about you.
And it's there.
A lot of, it's a lot of people's jobs now.
Yeah.
Like they get paid.
It's a business.
And something that I have a problem with personally, you know, is the whole, you're,
going to the wrong church if you know like like I'm gonna tell you something that nobody else have told you before then you're trying to elevate yourself right like and like all of these other pastors have not told you that they are so wrong leave the church leave those churches immediately no
You don't even know those pastors of those churches.
Like, why are you here just hating on people just to elevate your platform?
I get it.
Yeah.
It's the heart position in all of it.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
And you are bashing a blank group of people.
Because, like, I think sometimes when you have somebody that you know for sure is doing something wrong and needs to be addressed, that's one thing.
When you're just blankly saying things,
so that you sound very catchy and very profound and very good.
You don't know how much harm you can be doing to churches just so that you can get more views.
So you can get reposted.
So I think that it is all about the matters of the heart.
You want to show a persona
or you really are trying to show Jesus.
You're trying to get more views because then you're gonna become a little more influential or you really just want this message to be spread out because that's what we're supposed to do, right?
And I understand that right now, social media is a wonderful tool to share the gospel absolutely.
This is the times that we're living in.
So it is not about not doing anything.
what you're doing and why you're doing it.
That's good.
So why was it important that when Jesus was born that it was a very, and maybe we already answered it, but why was it such a humbling experience?
Like, he was born in a pager, they couldn't get, you know, a hotel, like how you said they went from, she was about ready, no, she wasn't ready to pop, you said.
No, it's not ready to pop, not that we know of.
Why do you think,
That was the experience that went with his birth.
Like, why do you feel like that was the case?
So we call it the upside down kingdom.
Okay.
So it's this idea of, you know, Jesus repeatedly talks about how the first will be last, last will be first.
We're here to serve.
So like, he's modeling what he's preaching.
So before he even preaches a sermon, his life is already demonstrating.
This is not about trying to attain some status.
This isn't about trying to be better than everybody else or higher up than everybody else.
There's a humility to this message that we're here to serve.
So he's the model.
And he said, I didn't come to be served, but to serve.
And so we're supposed to reflect Jesus in all we do.
And so that's how we should behave.
And so by starting off,
talking to shepherds by starting off being born in a manger, right?
He's setting the tone for the rest of his life in his ministry of what he's gonna be doing.
So it's that whole practice what you preach kind of thing, and that's Jesus was doing that.
And I think that it's also kind of culture, right?
We are programmed to want to elevate ourselves, to want the opulent life, to want the things that are
You know, fine, like the finest things in life.
You see the kings, you see the presidents, you see the...
the royalties, and you're like, oh, the life, right?
And that's what everybody aspires to.
So I think that Jesus coming in that way is showing us, we are not to fit in with the culture of this world.
We are to fit in with the culture of heaven.
We are not trying to be like everybody else, and now we're just gonna pump ourselves out on something else.
He's saying, this is not the culture that I want you to fit into.
like I am I am create we are creating a different lane because this is the culture of heaven so I think that it is and it's another part of those when he talks about we all have to carry our cross you know yeah and died daily you have to die to your own ideas to your own plans to your own desires of of opulence and success and that doesn't mean that you don't
make any money or that you have to have the broken shoes or anything like that.
That is not what it means.
It is the posture of your heart has to be humble.
That doesn't matter if you have millions or if you have $10 in the bank.
That is not what has you.
That you are all about the kingdom.
And I think that that's what Jesus has demonstrated.
He has everything.
He is literally the creator of every single thing that exists.
Yet, he doesn't come here trying to pull rank.
Yeah.
And saying, like, everybody move out of the way, because I have arrived.
Right?
He is showing us that I can own everything, and yet I'm still going to serve you.
So I think that it is just such a change in culture.
It's a shift.
And I think that it's very difficult for most of us humans.
You have to be very intentional in not allowing yourself to get there.
That's so good.
Well, let's, um, before we land the plane, I wanted to talk about one last thing because I feel like it was a very, um, big moment for your message yesterday, which is that word unto us.
And, um, so like, let's unpack that and talk about why that, that is so important for us to grab holds to, you know, as believers, as disciples of Jesus.
So for me, it really jumped out of the pages, right?
Because the angel is with all the shepherds.
We don't know how many shepherds were there, but with the shepherds.
And it's telling them that the Savior has been born for all people.
So he's making this global call, this global gospel, saying it is not just for the Jews, it's not just for the people of Israel, it's for all people on earth.
And then it goes and laser focuses
and goes personal, right?
Like this is for everybody, but it is also for you.
So I think that it is that moment of, it is, this savior is for the whole world, but not just like, oh, Jesus loves the whole world.
Yes, but he also loves me.
Yes, but he also loves you, right?
So it is the everybody and you.
So I think that that is just so beautiful that the angel in this very moment is giving that That gospel well-rounded message to the shepherds saying he is here to save the whole world, but he was born for you He was born so that you can be safe
He was born so that you can have redemption.
He was born so that you can be reunited with a father.
He was born so that your sins will be washed away.
And so I think to me, that was just very beautiful, because it is this personal connection to the Savior that has just been born.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Beautiful.
What do you think?
I agree 100%.
For unto you.
For unto you is born.
Yeah.
No, it's a beautiful moment, and I do like the
Right before that he's talking about for the whole world, right?
Like it's this globe, but then he does focus in on the individual.
And that's absolutely something we got to take away from this, is that Jesus came for me.
He came for you.
Yeah, he's beautifully said.
Got nothing to add.
So sorry, I was gonna say because we were talking about this and we were talking about how
You needed to explain this probably better than I could ever.
I don't remember what this conversation was.
Yes, they're in the car.
Because I was saying, you know, the whole Christmas on December 25th.
And I'm like, I mentioned just celebrate Jesus.
I mean, come on now.
But I know that if I probably don't have all of the extra knowledge that you do have over the actual
I mean, not the date, I should say.
I don't know how the actual date.
That will be great.
But you know, like I think that a lot of people just
consider Christmas not as special, because we know that Jesus was not born on December 25th.
And I don't know, maybe it is just, I am such a Christmas fan that I'm like, that's great.
You don't matter.
You were that great.
You tell them Christmas is not about, that's not the day.
Just give me my Christmas tree.
Don't tell me none.
Yeah, Sol is very much not the Grinch.
She loves Christmas.
Christmas is life for Sol.
She just hates Christmas carols.
And after you sang one of them in Spanish, I can agree.
That's not a very good song.
And Mary definitely did know.
Mary didn't know.
She knew.
Yeah, so Christmas Carols just did it all wrong.
So anyways, yeah, the whole December 25th thing, it comes around every year.
Easter's coming up, and they're going to do the same thing with Easter, where it's like Christmas is pagan, and Easter is pagan.
I still don't understand the bunnies, but that's beside the point.
Yeah, there's all kinds of elements that are, yeah.
And actually there is like an explanation for why that became a thing.
But anyways, so December 25th was that Jesus' birthday?
Probably not.
It actually started in the fourth century and it was literally like the starting point for it.
Some will make the claim that it was Constantine.
I might have blanked on that for a second.
Some will argue there was Constantine trying to co-op Roman holidays to push for Christianity to be a bigger thing and make it more palatable.
And there's literally no history that supports that.
Nothing supports this idea that they took a Roman holiday and turned it into Christmas.
So that's just debunked immediately.
The 25th was agreed on in the 4th century.
by the majority of Christians.
Orthodox still do like January 6th.
The Russian Orthodox and the Greek Orthodox I think both do differently.
I think it is.
I think it is January 6th.
I could be wrong on that because it's not my field of study.
But yeah, so, but the majority of Christians since the 4th century have been celebrating Jesus' birth on December 25th.
The original dating for December 25th was just this weird superstition that important figures
would die on the day of their conception.
And so yeah, so like the same day, obviously not same year, but so whatever day they were conceived.
And so if you take Jesus' death in March, which was fairly well agreed upon in that time, if you take his death in March, if you back up nine months,
his conception, or from his conception, then you land at December 25th as his birth.
Like it's a weird, like there's a math to it that I don't even remember, but in the fourth century they had the superstition and so they came to December 25th would have been the day that he was born based on this belief of important figures in history would have this conception death date.
It was weird.
It didn't even make sense to me when I first read it, but it was basically just, fourth century they picked that day.
And that's when they said, this is when it's gonna be.
And so now we just celebrate it.
Now, all of the pagan claims have all been debunked by guys way smarter than me that bring up the scholarly stuff for both Christmas and Easter.
The two guys that I already talked about, Wes Huff and Inspiring Philosophy will do a bunch of stuff on it.
Inspiring Philosophy does a video every year on Christmas is not pagan.
He sells t-shirts saying Christmas is not pagan.
And he's got all kinds of research to show you where it falls apart.
Uh, but yeah, so we celebrate December 25th because we've been celebrating December 25th for, uh, what's that now?
17, 18 centuries?
Forever.
Since the 4th century.
Right.
Um, and we're now in the 21st century, so 17, is that?
No, that's not the math on that.
You, you're, I'm, I don't know.
Whatever you say, I'll say yes.
Holy, that's it.
Somebody out there is like, this guy's an idiot.
No, he doesn't even know how to count.
He doesn't even know how to count.
And we're not helping.
Somebody bring me a calculator.
So does it actually matter if Jesus was born on December 25th or not?
No, it doesn't matter.
In the same way, there are times when one of our kids has a birthday and it's on a school day.
And so we say, hey, we're going to celebrate your birthday on Saturday.
Does that make that Saturday less important?
No.
That's good.
We're recognizing our child.
We're celebrating his life on a specific day.
Is it the actual day of his birth?
Not always, but that's okay.
And how much more so when you don't know the date of birth?
Especially because it's not something that you are doing to be deceitful or anything.
It's something that we just don't have a birth certificate with his little footprint that says we was born this day, at this time, weighed this much.
That would be amazing.
That would be fantastic, but we don't have that.
We've just chosen a day to recognize him and honor him.
Because without his birth, where are we?
Is that standard for that time period?
Like you just didn't keep record of the births that were taking place?
Or is it because he was born in a manger?
No, record keeping at that time is going to be like, you don't even have like the birth dates of some like kings and people.
Like it's just record keeping at that time, whether they did keep the records or not.
Like writings from the first century are hard to come by because they degrade.
And so that's why we have copies of copies because if it was the original, the original was probably destroyed long, long, long ago between just the materials would wear out unless it was on stone or on leathers sometimes.
But any kind of papyrus, any kind of paper product would have basically been dissolved by the time you get to the 21st century.
So that's why we deal with mostly copies of copies.
A man being born in a manger to a random woman that has no political power or authority.
Like, who's writing that down?
Nobody.
Nobody's writing that down.
That's just not a thing that's going to happen.
Wow.
Yeah.
OK. Well, that's that.
I think that this was a well-rounded conversation.
We're all over the place.
We went in order.
I feel like Luke is kind of like giving you these big moments in a short period of time, so we have to cover around.
Can I tell you one thing that I came across that we cannot prove.
Oh, it's so cool.
That we cannot prove.
But if it is true, that would be one of the coolest things ever.
What is it?
But we preface this by saying is we don't know there is no way to prove this accurate or inaccurate.
Right.
It is a thing that some people have theorized.
Yes.
And claimed there is no way to prove it.
But if true, it's if it's true, it would be so huge and so amazing.
So, you know how the.
Oh, it's big.
This is literally this is one of those things where it's like, wait, what?
Yeah, that would be, okay, anyway.
At least for me.
For me too, I read that, I was like, what?
So, you know how the Bible talks about, it looked to you, that the shepherds were just out in the field right outside of Bethlehem, right?
And they were watching the sheep.
It is believed that they could have been the same.
Theorized by some.
That they could have been the same shepherds, and that they were watching
where the flock that they will use for sacrificial lambs in the temple.
Because of the proximity the Bethlehem has to Jerusalem, to the temple of Jerusalem, it could have been that they were the ones watching over the lambs that they will bring for ceremonies and for the sacrifices and offerings.
So if that is true, how could it is the fact that the angel comes to them
for them to go to Jesus, who will be the ultimate sacrificial lamb for all of us.
So they left the sacrificial lamb to meet the sacrificial lamb.
That is cool.
I'm telling you, like, if that's true, that's big.
That is pretty big.
But that's also why we have to preface it by saying there is no way to confirm or deny that.
It is just believed because of the place where they would have been.
Wow.
And the animals that they were watching.
So they just disbelieved that they could have been the ones actually watching for the animals that will be sacrificed at the temple.
That just gave me chills.
Super cool.
Yeah.
I was like, and I wanted to say that on the service.
I was so excited.
She came running to me and I was like, I love it.
She was like, I'm not going to say that in the message because I cannot.
There's no way.
Like, yeah, you can't.
There's a lot of things that you can't really prove.
But they sound really good from a preacher.
Yeah.
They preach really well.
And that's such a like, we've got to be so cautious.
Preach well.
But, you know, you start saying things as definitive that you don't have any definitive proof that it's definitive and it just gets dangerous.
But I was like, so I love it.
I love it so much.
Can't use it.
But yeah, no, I think that to me it is just it just paints this beautiful picture.
You know that you are the one that is
that is carrying and bringing these animals to be sacrificed for the atonement of sin in the temple.
And now you are privileged to go and see the one who will ultimately be sacrificed for the sin of the world.
How cool is that?
That's pretty awesome.
I love it.
Yeah.
Yeah, I was just going to add to my explanation of December 25th was pretty
Rocky, so what I'll do is...
He's going back to it.
Yeah, it's bothering me.
It's bothering me because it's like I'm blanking on some of the details.
And so I've got a couple... You don't need to close the land to play.
He's like, wait a minute, I got to do this.
So what I'll try to do is like post a couple of like infographics and stuff from research about Christmas and 25th and why is it pagan and all that.
But yeah, just I hate leaving people like,
Cause basically all I did was say, trust me.
Trust me bro.
And I hate that.
I don't do the trust me bro.
So it just, it didn't sit well with me.
So I'll post some.
Thank you for your wisdom for leaving that out and for bad tracking.
The wisdom enough to say I'm an idiot.
No, no, we're not using those words.
Hope has words in 2026.
We're gonna put them in the corner.
You put me in time out like the angel did.
I mean,
It's so much to unpack, but I don't know how long we've been going.
But even the part about the angels meeting the shepherds in the field, I don't think I ever knew that until yesterday.
And maybe it's just something I just glossed over.
Or maybe I was just leaning on the stories I heard from a child.
And I didn't read Luke too.
So I thought that was cool.
So I would just encourage you to go and re-watch that episode.
You can find it, of course, on our YouTube channel if you're watching this between sermons.
But on YouTube, we are a disciples church.
But let's land the plane and give our takeaways for people to chew on.
Who wants to go first?
I can go first, since I already breached it.
For me, the takeaway, and that's what I was trying to leave people with yesterday,
is that the shepherds had an incredible invitation to go see Jesus, you know, to go and meet the Savior.
And I think that the same invitation is still available to all of us today.
So if you have not gone to Jesus, or if you treat Jesus as the holiday God, run to Jesus every day.
You know, today's a good day to get closer to Jesus.
So respond to the invitation of coming to the Savior and praise Him for everything that you have heard and seen, like the shepherd said.
Yeah, I like that.
They went with haste.
Yeah, so much haste that they ripped their shoes.
Oh my gosh.
According to the Mexicanda.
And you had no shoes.
No, so I think for me it's the,
they proclaimed what they had heard and what they had seen.
And I think that that is part of the invitation, right?
They went with haste to see him, and then once they encountered him, they proclaimed everything they had seen, everything they'd heard, to marry, to the people, to whoever, right?
And I think that that's our response too.
So we have a response to Jesus.
We have an invitation to him.
We run to him.
But then from there, what do we do?
We keep on proclaiming.
Like that's the emphasis all throughout Luke's gospel is the good news.
Like we're supposed to preach the good news to all people.
And so that's what the shepherds did, that's what we're supposed to do.
Woo, but it's your thick of weight.
We're all in the spirit, because mine is also, and I highlighted it from your notes, when they encountered Jesus, they left His presence with praise.
I'll try not to get emotional, but like just lately God has been just feeling so or not that he hasn't felt real to me.
But I think as you, the longer you walk with God, the sweeter it becomes like that encounter.
And I remember I had a devotional time.
I believe it was either Friday or Saturday because I'd be lacking sometimes in my devotional time just to keep it real.
And I remember I just started to praise him.
and worship him and the word hallelujah just kept coming from my mouth to the point where I was like, okay, stop saying it, but it just kept coming to my mouth.
And God kind of like sat with me in that moment and I felt like having that time, like when you spend that time with him, how like praise and like admiration for him just comes out of you.
And so just man, I encourage you
to be in haste when you encounter, like meet him, like want to meet him, want to be with him.
He is the greatest gift.
Like I don't even know how to say it without getting him.
Like he is the greatest gift for us.
Unto, what is it?
Unto you.
Unto you, unto us.
The greatest gift for us.
And it's not just, even his birth is not just like this.
He came,
You know, he could have came as the king that he is, you know, that we talked about, but he came in such a humble way.
And it was all for us, like as an example and to serve us.
And, but he is truly the greatest gift.
And I pray that everyone watching this or go watch the message that you encounter Jesus in that way, that you leave his presence with that praise and with that, that desire to go and spread the gospel, the good news.
So.
Yeah, be one, make one.
Yeah.
That's my takeaway.
Let's go.
All right, until next week, we love you guys.
And I will talk to you soon.
Bye.